1. D is the best answer. This question requires one to identify the primary concern of the passage as a
whole. In the first paragraph, a recent hypothesis about the effects of caffeine on behavior was
presented. The second paragraph describes an earlier and widely accepted hypothesis about how
caffeine affects behavior and then presents evidence that is not consistent with that hypothesis. The
third and fourth paragraphs return to the newer hypothesis introduced in the first paragraph and provide
“evidence and arguments” that support this alternative hypothesis.
2. D is the best answer. The passage states that adenosine “depresses neuron firing” by binding to
specific receptors on neuronal membranes, which in turn inhibits the release of neurotransmitters. The
passage describes Snyder et al’s hypothesis about caffeine. They propose that caffeine binds to
specific receptors on neuronal membranes, which prevents adenosine from binding to those receptors
and “allows the neurons to fire more readily than they otherwise would”. Therefore, according to
Snyder et al, caffeine differs from adenosine in that caffeine permits neurotransmitter release when it is
bound to adenosine receptors, whereas adenosine inhibits neruotransmitter release.
3. A is the best answer. The effects of IBMX are discussed in the last paragraph of the passage. IBMX
apparently binds to adenosine-specific receptors on neuronal membranes, but, in contrast to the other
caffeine derivatives that Snyder et al experimented with, IBMX depresses rather than stimulates mouse
locomotion. Snyder et al respond to this experimental result by stating that IBMX has “mixed effects in
the brain, a not unusual occurrence with psychoactive drugs”.
4. E is the best answer. This question asks you to identify which compound, according to Snyder et al,
does NOT bind to specific receptors in the brain. Phosphodiesterase, identified as an “enzyme that
breaks down the chemical called cyclic AMP” is the only compound that is not identified as one that
binds to specific receptors in the brain.
5. B is the best answer. This question asks you to identify information that is suggested rather than
directly stated in the passage. To answer it, first look for the location in the passage of the information
specified in the question. The A1 and A2 receptors are mentioned in the passage & it goes on to
describe Snyder et al’s hypothesis about the effects of caffeine on behavior. They propose that
caffeine, “which is structurally similar to adenosine,” is able to bind to A1 and A2 receptors in the
brain, the same receptors that adenosine normally binds to. Thus, the passage suggests that the
structural relationship between caffeine and adenosine may be partially responsible for caffeine’s ability
to bind to A1 and A2 receptors.
