Skepticism means a skeptical attitude; doubt as to the truth of something.
I and III are synonyms while II and IV are antonyms.
Hence, option C is correct.
7. Spawned means to produce or generate a large number of.
II, III and IV are all synonyms and hence incorrect.
Only destroyed is the opposite of spawned.
Hence, option A is correct.
8. Statements I and II are correct and weaken the impact of the report. Both state that the informal 
employment stats have not been provided and that this area forms the majority of the 
employment in India.
Statement III is incorrect. It reinforces the importance of the report by stating it strengthens 
other similar data.
Only I and II are correct.
Hence, option C is correct.
9. Refer to:
‘..the estimates are based on administrative records of implementing the social security 
schemes, whose completeness, consistency and accuracy are unknown; and since a formal sector 
worker, in principle, can legitimately access more than one social security scheme, double 
counting is a distinct possibility. The release does not explain how the problem is addressed in 
the database. Therefore, rightly, experts have demanded the release of the administrative data 
for independent verification.’
As per the highlighted fragments, I and II are correct while III is not.
Hence, option B is correct.
10. Paragraph 3 talks about how the social schemes are applicable to a firm only once it reaches a 
certain threshold and how this shows that the people under a particular scheme may have 
increase by a huge amount but that does not correspond with an increase in actual employment. 
Basically, social security database is not a good source to understand about employment data.
This eliminates option B.
Option C is also incorrect as the paragraph does not state that enrolling is voluntary. Option D is 
incorrect as there is no matching of numbers as stated in the paragraph.
Only option A gives the best gist and states that the databases simply have the list of workers 
under the scheme but do not depict correct employment figures.
Hence, option A is correct.
11. Refer to: ‘The remaining workers are in the non-farm informal sector, spread across rural and 
urban areas. In fact, it is this sector that has grown in recent decades at the expense of the other 
two sectors mentioned above. Moreover, nearly half of the informal labour workers are selfemployed in household (or own account) enterprises, often engaging unpaid family labour. 
Varying degrees of under-employment or disguised unemployment are the defining feature of 
informal labour markets.’
Only I and III are correct. II is incorrect as the paragraph states only about half of the workers are 
self employed or engaged in unpaid labour and not ‘almost all’.
Hence, option D is correct.
12. All of the statements above are valid/plausible reasons for the job growth to be less than the 
growth in economy.
Hence, option E is correct.
13. Refer to:
‘. The Labour Bureau under the Ministry of Labour and Employment has been carrying out 
household surveys somewhat similar to the EUS since 2010-11.’
Hence, I is incorrect
‘The household surveys somewhat similar to the EUS since 2010-11. They show a decline in 
worker-population ratio between 2013-14 and 2015-16, suggesting a deteriorating employment 
situation’.
II is correct.
‘Since 1972-73, the five-yearly Employment-Unemployment Surveys (EUS) conducted by the 
National Sample Survey (NSS) have been the mainstay for analysing labour market trends.’
Biennial refers to an event that takes place every other year while this used to occur every five 
years. III is incorrect.
Only II is correct.
Hence, option B is correct.
