Statement III is opposite of what is needed.
Statements I and II are correct and indicate towards reasons for compensatory afforestation 
failing.
Hence, option C is correct.

2. Statement I is incorrect as it merely mentions who designed and approved the projects.
Statement III is incorrect as it shows that the projects were given clearance by a tribunal and 
does not indicate any foul play.
Statement II is correct clearly.
Hence, option B is correct.

3. Refer to: ‘. In a literate, urban society that has high access to the Internet, the lack of official 
information on urban development and its impacts can only be understood as an indirect form of 
public silencing.’
I is opposite to what is in the passage while III has not been mentioned anywhere.
II is correct as can be seen from the highlighted fragment.
Hence, option C is correct.

4. Refer to: ‘Many of the trees proposed to be felled are mature, local, fruit-bearing ones that 
provide clean air, shade and water recharge to humans and are homes to many birds. These 
areas of Delhi have served as the “lungs” of the city. However, the project reports overlook these 
qualities.’
As per the highlighted fragment, these qualities pertain to the important place that trees hold in 
our environment.
Hence, option D is correct.


5. Refer to:
‘ The National Buildings Construction Corporation, tasked with redeveloping half a dozen south 
Delhi colonies, on Monday assured the Delhi High Court that no trees would be cut for the 
project till July 4, which is temporary relief.’
I is incorrect.
‘From 2006, most construction projects have been approved based on an application form 
instead of detailed assessment reports. In 2014, schools, colleges and hostels for educational 
institutions were exempted from taking environment clearances as long as they followed specific 
sustainability parameters.’
II is correct.
‘Since Delhi is ruled by so many agencies, you can run from pillar to post and still not have a clue 
about who is in charge of what.’
III is correct.
Hence, option D is correct.
