Paragraph 1: Between September 2017 and April 2018, as per a CSO report, the economy added 4.1 
million new jobs in the formal sector. The CSO release defines jobs as ones that provide at least one 
government financed (or mandated) social security benefit such as Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF), 
National Pension Scheme, or Employees’ State Insurance Scheme. NITI Aayog and official economists 
have also put out similar estimates since early this year, inviting widespread skepticism among 
knowledgeable people.
Paragraph 2: How reliable or credible are the official estimates? Very little and for two reasons: the 
estimates are based on administrative records of implementing the social security schemes, whose 
completeness, consistency and accuracy are unknown; and since a formal sector worker, in principle, 
can legitimately access more than one social security scheme, double counting is a distinct possibility. 
The release does not explain how the problem is addressed in the database. Therefore, rightly, experts 
have demanded the release of the administrative data for independent verification.
Paragraph 3: Moreover, the official data suffer from a conceptual problem. The social schemes 
mentioned above are applicable to establishments above a certain size (of employment), and to certain 
kinds of enterprises. For instance, in the factory sector, those employing 20 or more workers are 
mandated to provide EPF to all the workers. So, if in a factory, employment goes up from 19 to 20 
workers, it comes under the purview of the EPF, to be provided to all the 20 workers. Thus, the EPF 
enrolment increases by 20 workers, but the additional job created is just for one worker. Herein lies the 
fault.
Paragraph 4: The formal sector stands at the apex of India’s labour market pyramid, agriculture being at 
the bottom, employing 50% of the workforce. The remaining workers are in the non-farm informal 
sector, spread across rural and urban areas. In fact, it is this sector that has grown in recent decades at 
the expense of the other two sectors mentioned above. Moreover, nearly half of the informal labour 
workers are self-employed in household (or own account) enterprises, often engaging unpaid family 
labour. Varying degrees of under-employment or disguised unemployment are the defining feature of 
informal labour markets.
Paragraph 5: Since 1972-73, the five-yearly Employment-Unemployment Surveys (EUS) conducted by 
the National Sample Survey (NSS) have been the mainstay for analysing labour market trends. Though 
infrequent, the database has served a valuable purpose of capturing the complexities of the labour 
market; access to household-level data lately has spawned rich and granular analyses of the informal 
economy. As the last round of the EUS was in held in 2011-12, there is no reliable way of updating 
employment trends. The EUS has been replaced with an annual Period Labour Force Survey, and a time 
use survey. However, it will be a while before these data series come up with stable and credible 
estimates. The Labour Bureau under the Ministry of Labour and Employment has been carrying out 
household surveys somewhat similar to the EUS since 2010-11. They show a decline in worker￾population ratio between 2013-14 and 2015-16, suggesting a deteriorating employment situation 
recently.

6. Which of the following is/are synonyms of skepticism?
I. Cynicism
II. Belief
III. Distrust
IV. Conviction
A. Only II B. Only II and IV C. Only I and III D. Only I, II and III
E. Only I, III and IV

7. Which of the following is/are antonyms of spawned?
I. Destroyed
II. Engender
III. Procreated
IV. Sired
A. Only I B. Only IV C. Only II and IV D. Only I, III and IV
E. Only II, III and IV

8. As per paragraph 1, which of the following could weaken the importance of 
having added 4.1 million jobs in the economy as per the CSO report?
I. The report is silent about the majority of the workforce engaged in the informal sector.
II. The formal sector accounts for just about 12-15% of India’s workforce.
III. The estimates supplement the data on organised sector employment reported 
regularly by the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
A. Only I B. Only II C. Only I and II D. Only II and III
E. All of the above

9. As per paragraph 1, which of the following could weaken the importance of 
having added 4.1 million jobs in the economy as per the CSO report?
I. The report is silent about the majority of the workforce engaged in the informal sector.
II. The formal sector accounts for just about 12-15% of India’s workforce.
III. The estimates supplement the data on organised sector employment reported 
regularly by the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
A. Only III B. Only I and II C. Only II and III D. Only I and III
E. None of the above

10. Which of the following is a suitable gist of paragraph 3?
A. The social security databases are lists of workers enrolled in the schemes, as an entitlement or as 
voluntary subscribers and not employment registers.
B. The social security databases lists out workers and accurately informs the actual level of employment 
in the firm.
C. The employees have the option to get themselves enrolled in social security schemes on reaching a 
particular number as specified by the Central and State laws.
D. The official data is matched with the register for social schemes to avoid any discrepancies in the 
calculation of the employment figures.
E. None of the above

11. As per paragraph 4, which of the following is/are some features of the non-farm 
informal labour markets?
I. It has grown the most in recent decades.
II. Almost all of the workers are self employed or engaged in unpaid labour.
III. This segment suffers from disguised employment.
A. Only II B. Only III C. Only I and II D. Only I and III
E. All of the above

12. What could be a/some possible reason/s for so few jobs to be created, given that 
the growth rate is more than 7%?
I. There is no proper record of job creation in the informal economy, which forms the bulk of 
employment, and hence no way of accurately knowing how many jobs have been created.
II. The growth has mostly been in areas which are capital intensive and not labour intensive.
III. There is a possibility that the GDP figures are overestimated on account of some changes in 
the new National Accounts Statistics (NAS) series and the economic growth is overstated.
A. Only II B. Only III C. Only I and II D. Only II and III
E. All of the above

13. Which of the following is/are true as per paragraph 5?
I. The Labour Bureau under the Ministry of Labour and Employment carryies out 
household surveys similar to the annual Period Labour Force Survey.
II. The results of the Household Surveys point to a worsening employment situation.
III. The Unemployment Surveys (EUS) conducted by the National Sample Survey (NSS) 
were biennial in nature.
A. Only I B. Only II C. Only I and III D. Only II and III
E. None of the above
